[SOUND] Hello, and welcome to another
Instructor Hangout with Rick and-
>> Ben.
>> Hi guys, nice to see you.
>> Look at that,
you know your name, that's amazing.
>> I know my name, aren't I clever?
>> Very good, in this video,
we're gonna talk about three big topics.
We're gonna talk about the ball getting
stuck in an endless loop conversation.
We've dealt with it
a little bit in the course,
we're gonna talk about it a bit more.
We're gonna talk about public
versus serialized field.
And we're gonna talk about messages,
in particular using the example
of OnCollisionEnter2D.
So, ready for some action here, Ben?
>> Yeah, I'm ready, Rick, and
by the way, those who are listening,
there's a slight benefit to
the format we're doing here.
Which is that it's designed that you can
consume this audio-only if you want to.
So of course,
you wanna see our beautiful faces, but
if at any time you wanna just kinda
pick up your mobile device and
go for a wander around the garden,
or stretch your legs, then do that.
Because we are designing
this podcast style,
to make sure that you can
consume this audio-only.
So cool, what have you got for me, Rick?
>> Awesome, so in Block Breaker,
we have a problem at the moment where
our ball gets stuck in an endless loop.
And that endless loop,
well, we had that problem,
we solved it by adding some
randomness when the ball bounced.
And we had some students say, well,
is there a better way to do it than
to add a little bit of randomness?
The way we're executing at the moment is
we're adding a velocity in a particular
direction.
So it's gonna go up to the right,
I believe,
is how we ended up [CROSSTALK]
>> Yeah,
something like 0.2 units per second or
something, up and right, I think.
>> Something like that, yeah,
and I changed it a little bit.
The notion of having it go
a little bit to the left and
a little bit to the right means you're
always gonna be bouncing a little bit.
It's not gonna necessarily get you out of
trouble, we wanna push you out of the way.
So I wanted to talk about that a little
bit, and maybe talk about some ideas and
solutions for
students who think that it's not the best
way to stop the ball getting stuck.
So what are your thoughts?
>> Okay, so I mean, so the issue is
that it's too deterministic, right?
You can set your paddle maybe
in a corner against a wall, and
the ball can just go
around forever in a loop.
And maybe the ball comes down and hits
the wall, and then it hits a paddle, and
then it goes back, hits a block, and then
maybe just goes around in circles forever.
That's the problem we're trying to solve,
right?
It's just boring gameplay.
>> Yeah, or gets stuck up at the top,
just [SOUND].
>> Or it just gets stuck at
the top behind the parked tiles.
Between an indestructible tile and
the edges of the game space and
it just goes [SOUND].
>> Or just left and
right across the screen or [INAUDIBLE].
>> Or just left and right, and
the physics engine is just
taking things too literally.
It's just going bounce precisely
back the direction you came, and
it's just taking things too literally.
So obviously in a real environment, we
would have some sort of surface roughness,
and some imperfections in both the ball
and in the walls of the play space.
And that would lead to some variation
in the way the bounce happens.
Another thing that will happen in
reality is that you would have some spin
on the ball that picks up at some point.
And that spin would change
the way the bounce happens.
So there's two approaches to this really,
I think, two kinda physical approaches.
There's all sort of hacky approaches,
like introducing some random velocity.
But let's think about the physics
of it for a sec first,
is that a good place to start for
you, Rick?
>> Yeah, that's cool, and-
>> So, sorry, go on.
>> No, I was gonna say, I'll probably come
from a little bit of the point of view of,
but it's a game.
I don't want it to behave like the real
world, cuz it's not the real world.
And I know you often come
from the standpoint of,
yeah, but let's study the real world to
see how it would actually happen, and
then pull them from what
we want from there.
So I'm interested to hear
what you've got to say.
>> Well, exactly, so
I know we're making a game here.
And we wanna do something that's just fun,
and we just wanna have to tweak,
tweak the game.
But in taking some inspiration from the
physics, literally, taking inspiration.
Excuse the microphone, squeak, squeak.
Taking inspiration from nature,
is we look at the nature of things and
then we can say, well,
what are our options?
So one option is to say, well,
as far as the game is concerned,
the ball is a perfect sphere, pretty much.
And within the limits of the floating
point numbers that represent that sphere
behind the scenes.
And the wall is actually pretty
much a perfect straight line.
Apart from its position in space is only
as actual as the floating points that
are representing it.
But apart from those little rounding
errors, the things that are round and
straight.
And one option is to effectively introduce
surface roughness by just saying, well,
don't always obey the law of reflection.
If the ball comes in at 30 degrees
to the right angle of the surface,
let it come out at a different angle,
right?
It could come out at 31 degrees or
at 29 degrees.
And the one way to do that,
which is what we're doing here,
is to just say,
well just introduce a bit more velocity.
Just knock it sideways, so
that's what we've done so far, and
that's a bit like surface roughness.
Incidentally, by adding velocity,
we are doing something that's
physically impossible.
Which is the ball is picking up energy
when it hits the wall, or the block.
And that could lead to it getting faster,
and faster, and faster, and
faster, which is not good.
Whereas in reality, it would get slower,
and slower, and slower.
So without gravity present, and
gravity's another thing we can talk about,
one option is just to
give it a nudge sideways.
And how have we found that works,
Rick, when we do that?
>> It's okay,
I found it solves most of the situations,
if we keep nudging it
in the one direction.
But the one direction's what adds
the cumulative velocity to it.
If we plus it a little bit and minus it
a little bit, then it equals out overtime,
and it's not gonna speed up.
But it's okay, it's not amazing doing
that, unless you add a lot more variation,
then it really does zing
it out of the problem.
>> Yeah.
>> But then you get the lack of
predictability, if I bounce it off
the wall, it's gonna go to there.
>> Okay, so another frame on this then,
before we go to gravity,
which changes the whole game.
Another frame on this would be to say,
well, how about if we introduce rotation?
I mean, Unity will support physics
simulation of the rotation of the ball.
It will support friction
on the surface of the ball.
There's no point in introducing a rotation
unless you simultaneously introduce
friction on both the ball, and
the blocks, and the walls.
>> Yeah.
>> If there's no friction,
the rotation is of no consequence,
if it's a sphere.
If it was a square or something, and
the spinning square rotating, yeah, sure,
that could hit something and
knock itself off from a corner.
But a sphere spinning or
a ball spinning against this flat surface,
there's no consequence
unless there's friction.
So you can introduce friction and
spin, and
then let the physics engine
just calculate that spin.
Now you could still get in a loop, but
you're much less likely to get in a loop.
It's very unlikely the ball's gonna end up
in a situation where it's going back and
forth between walls and it has no spin.
Introducing spin and
friction is something you guys can try.
Now what you need to do there is to
not lock the rotation of the ball.
If we're already doing that,
you'd wanna unlock that rotation.
You'd wanna make sure that you have
a physics material on both the ball,
the blocks, and the walls, and
then see what that does for you.
Now you can combine that with
the strategy Rick's already talked about,
having a little bit of a kick added in,
and see how that does for you.
So there's another option.
>> Yep, and you talked about gravity,
in the original version of this
course that you created some time ago,
you had gravity in there.
>> Mm-hm.
>> But I took gravity out, because for
me, gravity doesn't feel
good with gameplay.
If I want the ball to go bang up there,
and it goes bang, and then slowly drops
down, it solved the problem of it
getting stuck on the horizontal.
Like, you're not gonna go side,
side, side.
>> Yeah.
>> But I feel it doesn't feel as good,
gameplay-wise, to add in gravity.
>> So it's a question of degrees, right?
I think here, any amount of gravity
solves the fundamental problem
of the horizontal bouncing left and
right between two walls.
Eventually, the ball will stop doing
that with any amount of gravity.
Now there's a amount of gravity below
a threshold, below which you cannot detect
there's any gravity there, but
yet it still solves that problem.
So another option for people is to say,
put some gravity back in the game.
But don't put over the region
of 9.8 meters per square second,
like we have here on Earth, but
put 0.01 or something tiny, tiny, tiny.
You're not gonna feel it
in general gameplay, but
it will stop the horizontal
locking problem.
>> Wouldn't that cause a problem
that the ball slows down over time?
Cuz it's losing some velocity on the up,
I know, but it's gaining it on the down,
if we [CROSSTALK]
>> Yes, so
the answer to that's not super obvious,
right?
So that's an interesting thought pattern.
It's like, it loses on the way up, but
does it gain exactly that same
amount of velocity on the way down?
It turns out it does, and it turns out
again, the energy would be conserved.
The reasons for that are slightly
beyond the scope of this course.
But yeah, it's a conservative force field,
and the ball going up will lose.
Well, the way to think of it
without thinking about force is,
is actually to just think that as it goes
up, all of the kinetic energy, the speed
energy it loses, it's being converted
to gravitational potential energy.
And then on the way down, that gets
perfectly traded back into kinetic.
So a ball bouncing in
a gravitational game,
it'll hit the paddle at the bottom of
the screen the same speed every time.
>> Yeah, cool.
>> So it won't lead it to slow down.
Friction, drag, specifically linear drag,
will lead it to slow down over time,
that's a different issue.
>> Yeah, okay, so we've talked about
gravity, we've talked about friction,
we've talked about rotation.
We've talked about more
randomness when it bounces.
So there's some ideas if you want to stop
that predictability, the continuous loop,
there's some other things that
you can play around with there.
>> [CROSSTALK] Yeah, absolutely, and
if you wanted to do none of
that adding random velocities,
if you don't just like that,
it feels really weird,
the other thing you can do is
just tilt the paddle slightly.
So if you add in some gravity, and you
just tilt your paddle by 0.1 of a degree,
not even enough to see or tilt the
collider of the paddle by not enough to
see, that would help in
terms of paddle collisions.
You would also then need to
do the same to the bricks.
So you could just tilt the wall,
you've gotta think,
what can it get stuck between?
>> Yeah.
>> Well,
it can get stuck between two bricks.
So you would actually have to tilt
everything very slightly off to the side.
Or in the physics settings, tilt
the gravitational vector a little bit.
Not make it straight down, but
make gravity a little bit off y.
>> Yeah.
>> If that's available, and
then you can do that and it would always
work it's way out of the problem,
that's another option.
>> Yeah, that's cool, I like it.
Okay, another couple of things for that,
another couple of things, we talk
about serialized field versus public.
We've talked about that a little bit,
but I don't think we've given a good,
in-depth explanation of why in this
course, we always use serialized field.
If we want to expose the variable in
the inspector, we don't use public.
So I just wanted to touch
on that because I'm sure,
if folks have been looking around
on YouTube, or on the Internet, or
going through other courses,
they've seen people use public.
It's still a pretty common thing to do.
We don't do it,
why is it that we don't do that?
>> Okay, so it's not right or wrong,
I'm gonna come from an actions and
consequences standpoint here.
So when you write public in Unity, what's
happening is actually doing two things for
you in Unity.
Number one, it's making that
variable a public variable,
which means another class, another script
file, can reach straight into your thing,
and say, dot the name of that variable.
So it could be player.speed, and then it
can say equals, and just set that value.
So you can reach straight
into the state or
the instance variable of
the public member variable.
They're all words for the same thing of
somebody else's object from a different
class, and you can just set that thing.
So that's kind of, from an object
oriented programming standpoint,
which is what we're doing here,
the idea is that you hide your data and
you expose your capability.
With a car, you allow people to
steer the car left and right, and
to hit the accelerator and the brake.
But you don't allow them to directly
set the speed, or the position, or
the direction of the car.
That's a consequence of the inputs, right?
So you expose the controls but
you hide the state.
So doing public immunity does two things,
number one,
it makes that thing
public to other classes.
Which we think, if you're doing
object oriented programming,
is not good practice.
And the other thing it simultaneously
does is make that thing into
a serialized field.
And the thing is to not be confused
about the fact it's doing two things.
Our intention, our purpose is
to make this thing visible and
editable in the Unity Inspector.
Doing public does that, and
makes it available to all other classes.
Serialized field only makes it
available in the inspector.
It's more surgical, it's more precise,
it's more intentional to go in and
use serialized field than it is to
use the more wide reaching public,
even though it's slightly shorter to type.
Because later, you will get
yourself into problems with public.
>> Yeah, and it's something
at this stage of the course,
you might not know what
bad things can go on.
There's is a little bit of just trust,
and so if you go and accidentally change
something and then you don't know, or you
come back a week later or a month later.
And you don't know that
buried deep within your code,
you're changing a public variable.
Then you can go around and around,
and hours, and hours, and hours,
just trying to find that.
So it's one of those things that takes
a little bit more time to do, but
it's gonna save you that heartache at some
point, it's gonna get you out of trouble.
>> Yeah, at this stage,
me talking about classes, and objects, and
instances, it's all a little bit abstract,
right?
But again, go back to the car analogy,
it's a radio controlled car,
that's the thing you're making your class.
That's your player, let's say,
or your paddle, and
you just wanna be sure that if
it ain't steering right, and
it ain't behaving right, that you look
inside the thing for the problem.
You're not needing to look from
the outside, it's not like,
it's a radio controlled car but it's also
got some puppet strings that go in and
also can pull it around.
Then you really don't know
who's pulling the strings.
You want just really to be very clear
about what's controlling what, and that's
why we're trying to give you as little
rope to hang yourself with as possible,
that's what we're trying to do.
>> Awesome, thank you for that, [LAUGH]
a little rope to hang ourselves with.
Okay, so I've got one more big topic for
us to talk about here,
which is an explanation
of what a message is?
So for example,
we've worked on OnCollisionEnter2D.
We've used that, and we know that
that's getting called somewhere by
something,
>> Mm-hm.
>> At a certain point in time,
we're not calling it ourselves.
Other methods that we create ourselves,
we're saying here's the method.
And then down here, we say we're gonna
call it here and bring it to life.
So let's talk a little bit about that, and
maybe you can give a deeper explanation of
messages, where it's called, how it works.
>> Yeah, so we're working in the,
and first, and
first we need to note the context that
we're working in, we're in a game engine.
And what being in a game engine means
is that it is ultimately in control of
the execution of everything.
It starts the gameplay, it calls the start
messages on all of your scripts.
It then calls the update messages on all
of your scripts every single frame of
the game.
So if you're in an engine,
you're not actually in control,
sometimes the analogy I use is that you're
on an island there, and you're waiting.
You can't really do anything until
a bottle arrives with a little message in
it, that's from Unity saying,
hey, start is happening.
It's like, cool,
I'm gonna do something in response now.
Until that happens, you're on your own.
So, we know when Unity is
gonna call these things, but
we don't actually make
those calls normally.
You can call your own start method,
you can call your own update method,
it's a bit weird, you can do that.
So the difference between a message and
a function is simply that Unity will look
through all of your scripts for
a method that is called,
that has the signature void start,
with no parameters in the brackets.
And it will just call that on
every single object in your game.
You can't be sure the order it's
gonna do it in, by the way.
And you should be writing your code, and
we will teach you to write your code in
such a way that it doesn't matter
what order it gets done in.
That's order independent execution code,
we'll be doing that, but that's a message,
basically.
It's when the engine calls into a piece
of your code, it's how everything starts.
Without these, there's no way to even get
started, because your code will never run.
If you just write C# code and
you write all your own method names,
they'll never run.
They'll only run because start got called
by the engine, or update got called, or
OnCollisionEnter got called,
or something else got called.
That, and remember, you must cut and
paste those message names.
Cuz if you spell them even slightly wrong,
they won't get called and
you won't know why,
your code just won't run.
>> Yep, awesome, awesome.
FindObject and FindObjectsOfType,
that's something that gets me every time.
Not what we're talking about
here necessarily, but the whole,
make sure that you get it exactly right or
else it doesn't work.
>> Yeah.
>> Awesome, cool, so
those are the three big buckets we wanted
to talk about in this conversation.
Next up, we've got Laser Defender,
it's gonna be amazing.
Any words of wisdom about Laser Defender,
Ben, before we dive into it?
Yeah, just stay at the bottom of
the screen, shoot a lot, and stay alive.
>> [LAUGH] Great words of wisdom,
thank you for that.
Awesome, great Instructor Hangout, and
we'll see you guys in upcoming lecture.
>> See you, guys.